[Music]
what was the hardest thing to adjust to
when you first came into this prison
I've always naively I guess thought that
women were the gentler sex that the
weaker sex that's what society wants us
to believe and the fact that women can
stab a man to death 40 times I find that
incomprehensible south of Chicago in the
state of Indiana two prisons
hold some of America's most dangerous
female criminals
[Music]
the Rockville Correctional Facility and
Indiana women's prison house over 1,800
offenders many are serving long
sentences for extremely violent crimes
some will end their days how severely
was the victim hurt the bullet came into
close contact with his thigh and yes for
four weeks I was given access to a world
and the culture the like of which I've
never known and so you were cast as a
baby killer I was that I am that I'm a
lot more than that as well
but that's who I am
America imprisons more women than
anywhere else in the world
[Music]
this is Indiana women's prison my escort
sergeant McPherson is taking me to meet
the most notorious inmate in the state a
convicted double murder thank you you're
welcome
and Sergeant we're heading now to to the
administrative segregation unit this
unit is where our disciplinary offenders
are this is a what you call like a
punishment forum if we put them here to
give them time to think about what
they've done and to clear up their
negative behavior offenders in this unit
spent more than 20 hours a day locked in
their cells they have no contact with
the rest of the prison population hey
Cerie ready
Sarah Pender has been in this
segregation unit for nearly five years
this is punishment not for the double
murder for which she was convicted but
for an incident in 2008 which made
headline news across the country why do
you think they have given you this long
sentence as it were in segregation unit
because I embarrassed them how did you
embarrass them
well I escaped from what was supposed to
be a maximum-security prison how did you
do that
an officer aided me in what way I
embarrass he drove me out they have
these transportation bands that come in
to get fuel they have like their own
little gas station and we planned it so
that when he came in to get fuel then I
came out and got in a van how did you
manage to persuade an officer well I
didn't actually take to take you up I
didn't actually ask him yeah I know it's
a I was having when I was planning my
escape I plan on doing it by myself
and but I needed money and I didn't want
to ask my family because I would have to
lie to them about what it was for so in
order to make money I worked with this
officer who had traffic in contraband
and then my friends would sell it for
money and then I would get the money to
save up for my escape and so he was
making a lot of money because I was
paying him very well to do this and he
found out that I was playing an escape
and saw an opportunity to make more
money and so he said what if I can just
roll you out of here that would be worth
my while
and as a side note I also had a sexual
relationship with the officer and that
came out when I when I escaped and that
was very embarrassing to the department
I think I'm beginning to understand why
the authorities have taken such a strong
line on your case because you mentioned
it was an embarrassment I think it's a
huge embarrassment for them yes I and
the only explanation that they've given
my mother for why I am in here is that
I'm quote too smart for their facility
this is the Rockville Correctional
Facility from which Sarah Pender escaped
in 2008 she was on the run for more than
four months and was labeled America's
most wanted woman
leading the way back Indiana to state
troopers in an unmarked police car
bringing convicted murderer and prison
escapee Sarah Jo Pender back to an
Indiana State Prison defender has been
on the run from police since escaping
from the Rockville Correctional Facility
last August
she'll have no contact with the outside
she no phone calls no visits and will
minimize her contact even with staff
internally the state has been true to
its word and this has been Sarah
Pender's life ever since Scott Spitler
the officer who helped her escape was
jailed for 7 years
sergeant McPherson has known Sarah
Pender from the day she arrived at
Indiana women's prison she must have
struck at a very deep relationship
having targeted that male officer he was
having problems at home and she preyed
on that she preyed on his emotions she
made him feel that she was gonna save
him that she would be his everything
that she would replace what he didn't
have and he was so vulnerable he fell
for it so he did whatever she asked he
fell in love with her he fell in love
with her yes but of course she wasn't in
love with him she used him to get what
she wanted and that was to get out of
Rockville and you would put that down to
her ability to she is I've seen a lot
I've been here for over 20 years Sarah
is one of the best manipulators I've
seen
[Music]
out in the general population prisoners
must conform to strictly regimented days
three hours for recreation
[Music]
fifteen minute sittings for meals
apart from this routine inmates are
allowed out of their cells although they
are confined to their assigned units
thank you this is unit 13 offenders have
just returned from lunch
mmm-hmm what are you doing here today
I'm just talking she's doing a little
crafting I'll write you some cards
you're sending cards up Mother's Day
cards it's coming up so we got to get
him out yeah
does your mother come to see you here um
no my mother she lives out of state so
she really doesn't come up here much
she's never come to see you at all and
how long have you been in this prison um
since 2006 yes well it's a long time not
only for you but for anybody strong-arm
robbery trip yeah that's more for like
physical robbery like I didn't have a
gun or anything I was fighting punchy
you know that kind of stuff
what were you robbing Oh people sorry it
was three people what was this in the
street yeah we were driving around we
thought when we seen people walking we
hopped out the car bun rushed him kind
of beat him up knock him down try to
smash the person so youyou robbed three
people yeah
how much did you take oh it was only 300
hours from that robbery
so really wasn't nothing a stupid
decision not worth anything especially
all these years of my wife when you say
from that robbery you suggest that there
were other instances how old were you
when you started on this may I call it a
career well since I was about 13 school
um I went to school up until like tenth
grade then I started fighting getting
expelled and I just stopped going
I'm actually really smart in school I
always had straight A's but I just
couldn't stay there always
in getting out why couldn't you stay
there why did you find the need to fight
well I just have a really horrible anger
problem so I always let that get the
best of me even looking at you now I'm
finding it difficult to believe that you
are capable of having done that I'm very
much capable of it because you're still
very young
yeah I'm 25 and your sentence was 16
years to 8 if you behave well yes if you
control your anger and actually probably
in the most recent year I can say I've
been getting control of my anger and I
have two kids so I know I have to go to
two kids yes how old today there's seven
and nine two little girls do you feel
you have let them down by not being
there for them yes and I deal with that
every day and I really like my biggest
motivation to changing and being
different and coming out of here and you
know taking something from it not just
oh I've been in prison you know I want
to walk out of here and be something for
them I just do not want them to follow
this theme circle like my mother was in
prison you know this is the same what
full attempted murder and aggravated
robbery said that that was not perhaps a
great start for you in your life was
that's kind of what you know kicked
everything off mama leaving
[Music]
Eddie hearts will be free in only a few
months she'll spend much longer picking
up the threads of her life
[Music]
I'm on my way to the Rockville
Correctional Facility
[Music]
this is the largest women's prison in
the state of Indiana
I still need Boeing Joe
[Music]
Rockville is a clearinghouse for
convicts from all over the state some
will serve all their time here
others are assessed and moved on to
other prisons
every month on average 200 new offenders
arrived this is their first port of call
from now on their every action will be
governed by prison rules any sexual
contact of any kind between you and your
offenders
you are stuff go over there and get a
Styrofoam cup put your name on it
there's water in the orange thing from
the way an intake looks when she comes
in here can you tell what she might be
in for no I don't ever try to guess some
of them when you look at him and you
look at the offender it's like you
cannot believe
that that's what she's here for you'll
frequently surprised by well we've done
very much so yeah you would if you look
at you know the paper and then look at
her and you're going there's no way that
yep do you see many of the same people
coming and going yes they'll come in
that door back there and say I'm home
and I'm going really you know because
for some of them this is because they
have nowhere else to go okay I'm gonna
roll each finger I'm gonna start with
your right thumb
hello I'm Trevor have you been in this
prison before yes I have for a Fort
Wayne Fort Wayne Indiana I've been here
for possession of meth so I've been here
before but I always stayed like an
intake I didn't leave intake so but this
time I will yeah so this time you will
be in the general prison population what
what sort of prospect is that for you um
a little scary but at the same time like
I don't teach me a little morals you
know teach me not to come back do you
have a drug dependency um I've been to
rehab again I'm an extrude oh so yeah I
do how long have you been an addict um
since I was 17 I'm 28
did you have children I do have four um
fortune and for my oldest one is 13 avid
13 year old 12 year old nine year old
into six year old I'm trying to find a
hopeful road out of this for you what's
that I don't know I had to have a game
plan when I leave here I know that like
going back to life like when I got in
trouble this time I violated probation
because I didn't have no transportation
back and forth and I wasn't using and I
haven't used for maybe three months at
the most
you know and that's pretty good for me
because I was doing needles and all
kinds of stuff but three months is a big
step and I just wanted it a little bit
further and a little bit further but
it's just it's hard it's really really
hard
thank you very much is what I'm doing
good luck
new inmates have a month of prison
orientation they're easily recognized by
their orange uniform
[Music]
for every new arrival some other
prisoner is about to leave
[Music]
ma the search is quietly counting down
the Dennis
[Music]
I caught up with her on her mail
delivery round Martha how long have you
been in almost 20 years the thought of
getting out must be a exhilarating one
yes but you must also be worried about
getting back into the world after all
this time yeah I am but it on this time
has given me time to discover things I
didn't have before like patience and um
I know it's gonna be hard it's gonna be
a little bit difficult but I just take
one day at a time
and I'm just anxious to see how the
world is changing at 20 years you never
left to catch up on yes I have a lot to
catch up on and I have two daughters
grown that were ages almost 13 and 16
when I was incarcerated who are now 32
and 35 so I haven't seen them in a while
have you seen any of them since you've
been here I haven't seen my youngest
daughter since 99 she couldn't do it no
more and my oldest I stopped coming in
2005 because she didn't want to leave
without me anymore you missed quite a
lot I just went from here to Terre Haute
to the hospital not long ago and I was
awestruck at the things I saw and I had
had the officer tell me what it was
because I didn't I didn't know what it
was things things like what I seen this
little gadget once and I didn't know
what it wasn't some once it was an iPod
so I had to have him explain to me what
an iPod was coz I don't know and a cell
phone I'm used to your course phones at
home so but I was I'm like yeah I can't
wait you out and try these things I'm
I'm gonna type the person likes to learn
things and I'm curious and I'm gonna
find out then we'll get on Google I
found out all about Google and I know
them I just can't wait I just can't wait
to explore everything so you waiting to
make your entry back into the real world
yes and I've told my children that you
might still see a little prison in me
because I've been down so long
you know there might be this what I mean
that might be just one time when I look
at the clock and think it's count time
or not sure if I should answer the
telephone and money's gonna be strange
to my hands you know and so I said if I
act a little
different or if I wonder offer an hour
to don't worry about mom I'm exploring
have you thought what your first night
of freedom would be like when you can
sleep in a bed of your own I feel it
might show me how a little bit of heaven
would feel that's how I think of it is a
little bit of heaven you know in a dome
surrounded by other people heaven heaven
for 20 years
Martha search has been told what to do
and when
[Music]
all those decisions will soon be hers
alone
prison inmates and long sentences
survived partly on dreams of freedom but
in August 2008 one female offender Sarah
Pender actually broke out of Rockville
the convicted double murderer but
earlier told me that her escape plan
relied on the help of officers Scott
Spitler now since September we've been
hot on the trail of a woman authorities
have called a female Charles Manson now
recently she was added to the US
Marshals 15 most wanted list making her
the most wanted woman in America but how
on earth did the authorities explain the
fact that she escaped lieutenant Brad
Gray was on duty on the day of the
breakout
lieutenant gray what were your
impressions of Sarah Pender while she
was here she was always trying to get
get an advantage over someone or
something it was always about anytime
you talk to her if you ask her a
question she would typically respond
with what's in it for me and when people
you know either say that or give you the
impression that that's what they're
trying to do then then it should put you
on notice that you know you have to be
careful about how you're dealing with
them
[Music]
she got out through a back door
in this recreation building having
changed into casual clothes she hid her
prison uniform in the ceiling the door
alarms failed to go off and a white van
was waiting with panda crouching under
the backseat Spitler drove her out of
the West Gate and out onto the open road
what were your feelings about the fact
that this was an officer with whom you
would work very closely someone you knew
someone you had served with and someone
you respected as a as a colleague once
we discovered that it was him that that
had driven Pender out of the facility I
was just absolutely sick just sick to my
stomach
physically sick mentally sick over the
entire episode Sarah Pender proved to be
as you had probably thought but when she
came in here that she was just as clever
and manipulators you had originally felt
oh absolutely she proven hers has proven
herself to be that time and time again
and that is probably the the best proof
of it right then and there if you can
convince an officer someone who was
trained not to do that somebody who was
trained to maintain the order and the
peace of a facility if you can convince
that person to drive you out of a
Correctional Facility you can convince
anybody to do anything
the authorities were bruised by Sarah
pandas escape
she was put in solitary confinement and
has now been here for almost five years
longer than any other female prisoner in
the state
[Laughter]
[Music]
of the 1200 offenders at Rockville
Correctional Facility 85% of them are
mothers
[Music]
I'm on my way to Dom tree to where new
arrivals to the prison our house thank
you
poorer McIntosh a mother of four was
beginning the difficult process of
adjustment Paula what was your first
night like here like going in and all
the new girls was it a very talkative
Dom did you get some sleep
um they let me sleep they helped me they
talk to me a little bit tell me if I
needed any shampoos or anything yeah
yeah lot of noise one of that goes you
can wake up easy you know what was the
biggest shock to you
coming into intake when you like yeah
like not really to intake just like when
you drive up in that vehicle and you
turn around and you see that like the
last gate closed it's like your heart
goes instead yeah it's really hard
well you have a visit soon no no my
family won't come up here like my dad
like he doesn't really come and say yes
because he just it's just really hard on
him so I don't I'm pretty sure I won't
you know but this why won't your father
come to see you I think it's too hard on
him because there's me and then my
brothers I just turned 18 and he's like
that and it's just like a pattern you
know and it's I think it's really hard
on him so he won't come see me it's hard
on him but it's also very tough on you
that he wouldn't come to see you yeah
he's got my daughter he's got my nine
year old right now so you know he's got
a lot of responsibilities on him so I
said the I don't know performance I can
do your daughter is nine at that age
he's able to understand a great deal I
wonder what your what your father said
or says to her about your situation like
that before my daughters Melissa and
she's like she's really strong and she
knows everything I don't lie to her I
told her she knows about my drug use she
knows about my she knows everything
I called her this time told I was going
to prison I didn't see she's like just
keep your head up gosh that's a pretty
tearing to be told by your nine-year-old
daughter to keep your head up and but
even for you to make a call to said to
you're going to prison
and you have no idea when you'll see her
again no um her dad just got out of
prison and he's not seen her not one
time
and um she's nine and I guess he's just
like coming around my dad's letting him
come and see her like visits so that's
like a big step for her to when is this
it then it's like I'm there and then I'm
gone you know well I hope your time
passes here very quickly and I hope that
you get a chance to be reunited with
your daughter and your family thank you
very much for talking to me thank you
[Music]
at Indiana women's prison
it's morning recreation it's a chance
for inmates to make friends and
cultivate relationships which can be a
desperately important part of prison
life
[Music]
the most troublesome offenders have few
opportunities to do that they are
confined to this segregation unit they
have one hour out of their cells under
escorted shackled even to go for a
shower Sarah Pender cell faces that of a
friend
armed bank robber Desiree Hancock I
notice your opposite Sarah Pender yes I
love her that's one of my very good
friends very good friend she I would
like to give her a lot of credit for
partly the woman that I am today like
when I get ready to show out or I'll get
ready to snap because this place will
take you there she'll be like doesn't
rain shut up or shut up we'll sit down
and I'll go sit down I'll calm down in a
place like this friend is not a word
that you just throw around it's not
something that you just say because
women are very vindictive creatures and
they're very fake and they're very just
caddy they were smiling your face and
they just be like hey and I just hope
nothing but the best for you and then
you turn around and eat in blue slipped
you like 35 times they're trying to get
you and your girlfriend separated how
close do these relationships get you
mentioned women and her girlfriend
that's a it's a pretty pretty pretty
pretty pretty deep a lot of women don't
come in here gay I wasn't when I came to
prison but I am now and oh you are you
have become acting gay yes I'm a lesbian
oh yes I am but you you discovered that
or you became that when you here when
you came to this years before I came to
present to a man okay uh it's just I
don't know loneliness is what started it
and then
one thing led to another and it may seem
fake on outside but emotions and
feelings are real and you have had such
a deep relationship in this too great
Louis I've had a dozen relationships but
I've had two great loves and I had in
this prison and I will say that I
damaged both of them I gave you both of
them how did you do that how did you
dine each other huh being a cheater a
liar is it was like being at you
tomorrow like when you're in a
relationship it's like being a kid in a
candy store it's not just in one room
gets not one girliest 740 girls so in
order 740 probably only 40 ain't gay
mm-hm the rest them this is the gayest
place on earth the rest of them are all
gay
it's lunchtime on unit 13
inmates follow a well marked out route
to the food hall
[Music]
I meet up again with Eddie Hart's who is
hoping very soon to leave this place for
good am I allowed to grab one of these
what's up what's on the menu today this
is a chicken patty with gravy what is
this a chicken patty okay
gravy this is supposed to be cabbage and
this is some kind of Spanish rice
Spanish rice that's really not bad I'm
bashing the food but sometimes it really
isn't that bad like I'm gonna eat this
stuff
you guys ready say grace okay dear Lord
we come to you and thank you for this
meal we ask that you bless and let it be
a nourishment to our bodies and your
precious name we pray and thank you amen
amen
the great ways to watering still made it
really soggy the other thing is about
this place which is very obvious is that
this is an all-female environment which
you had to get used to right and that's
kind of funny because on the streets I
never really hung around females but
there's people here that I mean I'm
close with we need one of them mrs.
crusher we're close not like sisters but
you know just those people that you you
bond with and have fun wins okay we all
have a common bond
no matter your current we all have a
common bond like it's we could see
someone like of course I'm having a bad
day or Addie having a bad day and she
crying you know this is a no touch
facility I'm opposed to be hugging but
we do women needs to the comfort of hey
it's gonna be all right in there you can
tell me all day but if you touch me and
let me know it's gonna be all right is
everything on the surface so are there
deeper relationships in that in here
yeah but
I've been involved with Bieber
relationships in here and it just didn't
really go well so I just tried so you
were is that mm-hmm and it didn't go
well
no make you feel like it's going well
while it's going but one since they're
like out of sight they go home or
something it never goes as planned like
all the words they've said it doesn't
add up now you're looking forward to
being out in a few months but what what
are the fears what are the worries about
this world that you're going into after
six seven eight years what concerns you
really just the fact of being put back
in the same environment the same
surroundings you know in making the
other choice not the negative choice so
you're looking at the cabbage you can
have my cabbages please so you'll have
two cabbages - that's right you'll take
the chicken patty I sure will
I think I'm glad my presence here is
serving some purpose so you left me
you've left me bread and rice thank you
very much that's how it works around
here will you will you miss out he with
you miss yes I to me she's a youngster
so I think it's my job to put some meat
on her brain me for the little knowledge
on her so she won't come back here this
is not where you want to be I keep her
grounded like if she's mad I'm like okay
a deal is talk do you think that she's
going to stay out of trouble
I think so I think she got it right she
has babies
go home it kind of keeps me really
motive and that's the big punch of you
too is that you have your life back with
your with your children can't wait they
deserve so much more you know like this
has been my life and this is my parents
life and this was their parents life and
I'm just so ready to break that curse
that cycle the prison officers I spoke
to were optimistic that once she's
released any hearts stands a good chance
of keeping out of trouble
[Music]
at the end of my first visit I asked to
see the convicted double murderer Sarah
Pender again
hi Sara
once described is America's most wanted
woman her notoriety is a far cry from
her formative years and life as a
college student
[Music]
all that change in the year 2000 Penda
was charged with the murder of a couple
with whom she shared a house
they were actually shocked by her
boyfriend Richard hull but the
prosecution believed that Sarah Pender
was instrumental in planning the murder
she bought the murder weapon
[Music]
and she helped to dispose of the bodies
in this skip
she has a charles manson like ability to
manipulate people to act as surrogates
for and committing crimes the evidence
was overwhelming that if she didn't pull
the trigger she did everything else
Penda has always admitted helping to get
rid of the bodies
but she strenuously denies masterminding
the killings but she failed to convince
the jury Pender was found guilty of
double murder I kept hoping to get to
the bottom of the Sarah Pender story
okay the thing that I have always got
from the conversations we've had before
is that you are not typical of the
people in this prison environment
generally would you agree I would I
would I am I have a wider worldview and
I think that I've been able to glean
more wisdom than the typical person I'm
generally more educated I have thought I
have five years of college why did you
choose the path that ended you up there
it was an emotional attachment to
someone who when I found out that he
dealt drugs that I accepted it because I
didn't want to lose him so at every
stage you were aware of where that
codependency was taking you yes I went
into the relationship with my eyes open
however I was very very naive and I
never thought that it would bring harm
to me or anyone that I loved and like
most women I thought that I could change
him and I asked him to stop selling
drugs and to get a real job and he
agreed
and that was the path that I thought we
were going on at they tell you aware
that there were guns in the house or a
gun in the house yeah I bought the gun
it was my gun I he asked me to buy em a
gun if someone asks me to buy a gun my
first question would be a why me why are
you asking me to do it and what are you
going to use it for did you post those
questions yeah and he told me that I was
the only person who was who didn't have
a criminal background because in that in
itself is awfully suspicious what you
can't in America you can't buy a firearm
legally if you have a felony and so I
was the only person who was legally able
to buy it but I earned but I'm talking
about the fact that you were being asked
to buy a gun by a felon
the thought of being left alone
frightened me more than whatever
consequences would come from purchasing
a firearm
kind of a gun was this it was a shotgun
that you would use for hunting like I
think birds I don't know I didn't pick
it out but but in the end it was not
used for hunting birds it was used for
shooting two people with whom he was in
his disagreement yeah well he actually
had no disagreement with a woman he said
it he shot her just because she was a
witness the bear fact of the matter is
that you purchased a gun which was used
in the killing of two people
did you think about the victims of the
people who were killed in this in this
crime nothing more about their families
the woman had three kids
Patricia's she had three children and
despite the fact that they were both
felons drug dealers doesn't matter if
they were still people and they have
families that love them just like I have
a family that loves me and they can't
ever get those people back what did you
think when you heard the judge of the
prosecutor pronounce the sentence on you
because you were given a very long to
very long sentences yes I was given 110
years 110 years
what were your emotions on hearing that
dreadful sentence disbelief why did the
jury in the end conclude that you were
directly involved in the murder of two
people
I knew that I had I knew that I had
committed a crime but I knew I wasn't
guilty of murder and and I was willing
to take responsibility for my actions in
that case it was was it in somebody's
mind the mind of the prosecutors the
prosecuting authorities that you had
somehow encouraged or but manipulated
him into doing into into committing
those murders yes yes that was their
theory that I had that I had this is
where the entire or the entire
reputation of manipulation that I'm a
manipulator came from the prosecutor had
went forward on the theory that I had
manipulated Richard into murdering
murdering the victims and his theory was
that I wanted them out of my house you
are being judged or you as seen you are
perceived as a two-faced manipulator
yeah yeah which is really hard label to
carry every time I meet somebody new if
they are aware of my infamous reputation
it's a new Hirota jump and that's a
consequence of my actions
[Music]
next week I talked to a woman who took
the life of her three-month-old son so
you were cast as a baby killer I was
that I am that I'm a lot more than that
as well but that's who I am
I meet new borns Aiden what would you
tell your son when he is old enough
about where he was born in the
circumstances in which he was born I
would just tell him that Mommy made a
big mistake and hopefully he didn't
won't ever come to a place like this and
I speak to a murderer who managed to
stay on the run for 35 years I heard
something coming in the back door
and I thought oh no it's the cops
[Music]